Title: Large changes in biomass burning over the last millennium inferred from paleoatmospheric ethane in polar ice cores

Abstract:
Significance Biomass burning influences the climate system through direct emissions of aerosols, greenhouse gases, and chemically reactive gases. There is uncertainty and controversy regarding variations in past biomass burning, making it difficult to establish the climate sensitivity of biomass burning in current climate models. This study presents new measurements of ethane in air trapped in polar ice cores. The results indicate that biomass burning emissions exceeded modern levels during the Medieval Period (1000–1500 CE) but then decreased substantially during the Little Ice Age (1600–1800 CE), indicating the sensitivity of biomass burning to climate during the preindustrial era. Such positive feedbacks between biomass burning and climate may make it difficult to achieve societal climate goals. Biomass burning drives changes in greenhouse gases, climate-forcing aerosols, and global atmospheric chemistry. There is controversy about the magnitude and timing of changes in biomass burning emissions on millennial time scales from preindustrial to present and about the relative importance of climate change and human activities as the underlying cause. Biomass burning is one of two notable sources of ethane in the preindustrial atmosphere. Here, we present ice core ethane measurements from Antarctica and Greenland that contain information about changes in biomass burning emissions since 1000 CE (Common Era). The biomass burning emissions of ethane during the Medieval Period (1000–1500 CE) were higher than present day and declined sharply to a minimum during the cooler Little Ice Age (1600–1800 CE). Assuming that preindustrial atmospheric reactivity and transport were the same as in the modern atmosphere, we estimate that biomass burning emissions decreased by 30 to 45% from the Medieval Period to the Little Ice Age. The timing and magnitude of this decline in biomass burning emissions is consistent with that inferred from ice core methane stable carbon isotope ratios but inconsistent with histories based on sedimentary charcoal and ice core carbon monoxide measurements. This study demonstrates that biomass burning emissions have exceeded modern levels in the past and may be highly sensitive to changes in climate.
