Title: Ralph J. Cicerone

Abstract:
OBITUARIES To notify the community about a colleague’s death, send us a note at http://contact.physicstoday.org. Recently posted notices will be listed here, in print. Select online obituaries will later appear in print. Ralph J. Cicerone alph J. Cicerone, born in New Castle, Pennsylvania, on 2 May 1943, was the ﬁrst of his family to attend college and became a trailblazer in researching global environmental change. He died on 5 November 2016 at his home in Short Hills, New Jersey, in the company of his family. After completing his BS in electrical engineering at MIT in 1965, Cicerone re- ceived his MS in 1967 and PhD in 1970, both from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His thesis, on iono - spheric photoelectrons, was done under Sid Bowhill. Cicerone came of age scientiﬁcally in the 1970s, a heady but turbulent era for atmospheric science. A new class of syn- thetic chemicals called chloroﬂuoro - carbons (CFCs) provided more eﬃcient, nontoxic chemicals for refrigerants, spray-can propellants, foam blowing, and medical applications. But scientists recognized that chlorine atoms could de- stroy stratospheric ozone; that CFCs could deliver chlorine to the strato- sphere; and that the current use of CFCs would lead to their accumulation in the atmosphere over the coming century. The specters of global ozone deple- tion and predicted cancers from in- creased UV sunlight created a Jekyll and Hyde–like conﬂict with the myriad new technologies being sold under the guise of improving our daily lives. The CFC– ozone connection was the ﬁrst example of a society-initiated atmospheric change that could cause global environmental damage. The resulting contentious inter- actions of Cicerone and the other early scientiﬁc explorers with the chemical in- dustry has been dubbed the ozone wars. One of the hardest ideas to get across to the public and policymakers was how CFCs would reach the stratosphere, build up chlorine atoms, and destroy the ozone layer. Cicerone and others who recognized the CFC problem—including Paul Crutzen, Chuck Kolb, Michael McElroy, Mario Molina, Sherry Row- land, Steve Wofsy, and one of us (Sto- larski, then his colleague at the Univer- sity of Michigan)—led the charge; they ESVA, PHYSICS TODAY COLLECTION R Ralph J. Cicerone communicated not merely through sci- entiﬁc journals but also directly to the public. Cicerone pushed the science from the local to the national level, and he was responsible for the 1974 Ann Arbor City Council ban on CFC use in spray cans. That was followed by other local bans on CFCs, proposed amendments to the US Clean Air Act in 1977, and eventually the US and Nordic bans on such spray cans. The ozone wars were long and brutal, but they were ﬁnally resolved by inter- national scientiﬁc ozone assessments, detection of the Antarctic ozone hole and ozone depletion globally, and the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. The scientiﬁc accomplishments of those early explor- ers were recognized with the awarding of the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Crutzen, Molina, and Rowland. Cicerone’s career shows lessons learned from the ozone wars: Scientiﬁc integrity is tantamount, facts must not be subjugated to political favor, collegiality among scientists is key, and global envi- ronmental and societal change is the story of the coming century. Cicerone is best known in the scien- tiﬁc community for his leadership in ushering in the modern era of atmos- pheric chemistry and biogeochemical cy- cles of the Earth system and for coupling that knowledge to societal eﬀects of ozone depletion and climate change. His re- search led to new ways of understanding global atmospheric changes and identify- ing the causal chain that implicated hu- mans. When most scientists involved in atmospheric chemistry were not inter- ested in the biosphere, Cicerone studied methane and the complex systems that produce it, consume it, and sometimes release it to the atmosphere. His investi- gation of methane emissions from rice paddies was one of the ﬁrst biogeochem- ical research projects; he studied the nat- ural biogeochemistry of a human-made compound to better understand its envi- ronmental threat. The new information was critical for assessing the damage to the ozone and climate from agricultural chemicals and inﬂuenced the national debate on regulating them. Beyond his scientiﬁc accomplish- ments, Cicerone was unique in organiz- ing and energizing scientists. As director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Re- search in 1981–89, he inﬂuenced a gener- ation of scientists. In 1990, working with Rowland at the University of California, Irvine, he founded the new Earth system science (ESS) department—the ﬁrst at a university to focus primarily on global change. Cicerone became Irvine’s dean of physical sciences in 1994 and chancellor in 1998. Throughout his career, he main- tained the perspective that the best sci- ence is accomplished by the best scien- tists working together as a community. In 2005 Cicerone was elected president of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), from which he just retired this past summer. As NAS president, he empha- sized objective scientiﬁc studies in sup- port of public policy. Among them are ones on climate change impacts, past tem- perature reconstructions, active remote sensing, and solar observations. In the face of an administration and Congress that doubted climate change, Cicerone used NAS funds to organize an independent review of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 2001 assessment; it aﬃrmed the IPCC’s ﬁndings. When the IPCC became involved in another major controversy, Cicerone organized the in- ternational group of national science academies, and the resulting review helped save the international climate FEBRUARY 2017 | PHYSICS TODAY 67
